---
title: In Focus
layout: in focus
permalink: /In Focus.html
---
 {% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Introduction;Perspective and Truth; Pan_Caribbean Connections; Selling a War" %}

# The Spanish-American War (April-Dec1898) saw the clash of two imperial powers, one in decline, Spain, and the other in ascent, United States. Yet, what the name of that war failed to grasp was the fact that the war did not take place in either Spain or the United States. The absence of Cuba in the naming of the war points at the silencing of Cuba in its struggle for independence from Spain, and the role of propaganda in the engine of imperialism. 
Similar to the American press, the Spanish government used a propaganda machine to justify its cruelty and expensive wars in Cuba.  From the Ten Years War (1868-1878) and onwards, Spain used several smear campaigns to discredit the Cuban rebels (called mambises) and their claims for independence. Newspapers, political cartoons, and other forms of printed materials served that purpose. Such is the case of the Chocolates E. Juncosa Trade Cards, a series of 36 chromo trade cards from an unknown artist (or artists), depicting the Cuban War of Independence (1895-1898) and The Spanish-American War. The Spanish company Chocolates Juncosa ( also known as Fábrica de Chocolate de Evaristo Juncosa, Chocolate E. Juncosa, or just Chocolate Juncosa) produced these trade cards around 1910 after the war had ended and as a form of popular, collectible material accompanying its chocolates.
{% include feature/image.html objectid="juncosa_intro.jpeg" width="75" %}
Using the process of color printing, known as chromolitography, these images document important battles, historical figures, places, and life in rural, military camps from Spain’s perspective. This exhibition provides an opportunity to tell the general public about the war from the Cuban and Caribbean’s standpoint. Using digital humanities methodologies and organized by thematic areas, the exhibition proposes a counter-narrative to the one presented in these chromo trade cards. 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="juncosa_002a;juncosa_003a;juncosa_010a;juncosa_011a;juncosa_029a;juncosa_031a;juncosa_033a" width="50" caption=false %}
#If one looks at these images without knowing the history, one might think that Spain won the war. The majority of the trade cards depict the Spaniards at the forefront, in a dignified, and victorious way. Whereas the Cubans are presented in a rudimentary manner, without distinguishing features, always in the run, injured, or defeated, and racialized subjects. If we look at the language used in the description at the bottom of each card, we can notice a common pattern when it comes to referencing the Cuban rebels.
{% include feature/image.html objectid="Zayas" width="50" caption=false %}
One word, in particular, is repeated throughout the cards, the word cabecilla (ringleader), which bears a demeaning connotation in Spanish and is used to equate the Cuban leaders with bandits.
{% include feature/image.html objectid="juncosa_002a;juncosa_003a;juncosa_010a;juncosa_011a;juncosa_029a;juncosa_031a;juncosa_033a" width="50" caption=false %}
Another diminishing word used to describe the rebels’ actions is filibustero (filibuster). This type of language presented the idea that the war in Cuba was an affair of pillage, piracy, and bandits. 
Against this representation of the war, and keeping in mind that a ‘rudimentary’ enemy fought against Spain for ten years first, and then after a peace treaty and unfruitful strifes, the war began again for three more years, it is fascinating to consider how differently this war looked from the Cubans’ perspective. The Guerra Necesaria (1895-1898), as Cuba’s National Hero José Martí (1853-1895) baptized it, saw the remarkable organization of the Cubans inside and outside (mainly in the U.S) the island, the close collaboration with other Caribbean leaders, and the amazing fundraising for the financing of the war. 
Despite the biased portrayal of the war, a couple of truthful representations call our attention. First, the different places mentioned in the cards where the combats and military actions are taking place, and second, the presence of women among the Cuban rebels. On the one hand, these details confirm that the war engulfed the entire island, affecting every aspect of the economic, political, and social life, and pointing at the high levels of the strategy of the Cuban insurgents. On the other hand, the presence of women recognizes their role in anti-colonial politics, their active participation in the military, and the political wings of the independence movement.
##


